Light and Fluffy Buttermilk Pancakes
Classic buttery flavor and golden brown, crisp tops and bottoms, but with a lighter texture.

By J. Kenji López-Alt  Updated on September 20, 2025
Prep Time: 15 mins
Cook Time: 20 mins
Total Time: 35 mins
Servings: 4 to 6 servings
Yield: 16 pancakes
Ingredients
Basic Dry Pancake Mix:

10 ounces (about 2 cups) all-purpose flour

1 teaspoon baking powder

1/2 teaspoon baking soda

1 teaspoon kosher salt

1 tablespoon sugar

For Each Batch of Pancakes

2 large eggs, separated

1 1/2 cups (about 12 ounces) buttermilk

1 cup (about 8 ounces) sour cream (see notes)

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, plus more for serving

Warm maple syrup

Directions
For the Dry Pancake Mix: Combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and sugar in a medium bowl and whisk until homogenous. Transfer to an airtight container. The mix will stay good for 3 months. (See note.)

For each Batch of Pancakes: Place one batch of dry mix in a large bowl. In a medium clean bowl, whisk the egg whites until stiff peaks form. In a large bowl, whisk the egg yolks, buttermilk, and sour cream until homogenous. Slowly drizzle in the melted butter while whisking. Carefully fold in the egg whites with a rubber spatula until just combined. Pour the mixture over the dry mix and fold until just combined (there should still be plenty of lumps).

Heat a large heavy-bottomed nonstick skillet over medium heat for 5 minutes (or use an electric griddle). Add a small amount of butter or oil to the griddle and spread with a paper towel until no visible butter or oil remains. Use a 1⁄4-cup dry measure to place 4 pancakes in the skillet and cook until bubbles start to appear on top and the bottoms are golden brown, about 2 minutes. Carefully flip the pancakes and cook on the second side until golden brown and completely set, about 2 minutes longer. Serve the pancakes immediately, or keep warm on a wire rack set on a rimmed baking sheet in a warm oven while you cook the remaining 3 batches. Serve with warm maple syrup and butter.

Notes
Pancake dry mix can be scaled up as many times as you'd like. Each batch of pancakes takes 11 ounces of dry mix to make (about 2 cups plus 2 tablespoons). The sour cream can be replaced with more buttermilk.
